releases: add tidb 5.0.1 release notes (#5392)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-5.0.1.md

---
title: TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes

Release date: April 23, 2021

TiDB version: 5.0.1

## Compatibility Changes

## New Features

## Improvements

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

+ TiKV
    - Use `zstd` to compress the snapshot [#10005](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10005)

```

> 

Reviewer 2: +Tools
   - BR
       * * Fix the issue that the summary log is not clear. [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)

## Bug Fixes

+ TiDB

    - Do not prune all columns for Projection [#24093](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24093)
    - Fix wrong query result when column contains null values [#24063](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24063)
    - Do not build MPP plan for scan with virtual columns [#24058](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24058)
    - Fix wrong PointGet / TableDual plan reused in plan cache [#24043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24043)
    - Append common handle columns into the schema of index merge table plan [#24042](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24042)

>     - Fix type merge about bit type. [#24027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24027)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the type merging about BIT type [#24027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24027)
```

>     - Planner: fix wrong TableDual plans caused by comparing Binary and Bytes incorrectly [#23918](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23918)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix wrong TableDual plans caused by comparing Binary and Bytes incorrectly [#23918](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23918)
```

>     - Planner: fix the issue that planner hints don't work in some batch/point-get plans [#23685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23685)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that planner hints don't work in some batch/point-get plans [#23685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23685)
    - Fix the cases that DDL would parse the args failed when converting job status to rolling back [#24080](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24080)
    - Fix range building for binary literal [#24041](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24041)
    - Fix wrong results for in clause [#24023](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24023)
    - Fix the wrong result of some string functions  [#23879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23879)
    - Users now need both INSERT and DELETE privileges on a table to perform REPLACE [#23939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23939)
    - Fix performance regression of point select [#24070](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24070)
```

    - Fix problem that behavior of TiFlash coprocessor's bitwise operator is different from TiDB [#1774](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1774)
    - Fix false alert of overlapped ranges if prefix next key is used [#1771](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1771)
    - Fix the problem that TiFlash coprocessor's cast string as int function may produce incorrect result. [#1768](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1768)
    - Fix the issue that continuous and fast writing may make TiFlash OOM [#1739](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1739)
    - Fix bug that duplicated column name will make TiFlash throw error. [#1732](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1732)
    - Support complex query plan tree with a max depth of 100. [#1722](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1722)
    - Fix potential NPE in schema sync service when database is dropped between GC and getting the database info. [#1708](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1708)
    - Fix the crash that causes by applying Raft commands to dropped tables [#1702](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1702)
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash may panic during br restore [#1698](https://github.com/pingcap/tics/pull/1698)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

+ TiKV 
    - Fix IN expr(coprocessor) didn't handle unsigned/signed int properly [#10018](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10018)
    - Fix the issue that there are lots of empty regions after batch ingest. [#10015](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10015)
    - Fix potential panics when input of cast_string_as_time is invalid UTF-8 bytes [#9995](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9995)
    - Fix the bug that TiKV cannot startup when the end of file dict file is damaged. [#9992](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9992)

```

## 下面是未分类的 notes。请对以下 notes 分为 [New Features](#new-features)、[Compatibility Changes](#compatibility-changes)、[Improvements](#improvements)、[Bug Fixes](#bug-fixes) 四类，并移动到上面对应的标题下面。如果 Notes 多余，请进行移除。

> + TiDB
> 
>     - Ddl: fix the covert job to rollingback job [#24080](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24080)
>     - `Fix performance regression of point select.` [#24070](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24070)
>     - Fix range building for binary literal [#24041](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24041)
>     - Fix wrong results for in clause. [#24023](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24023)
>     - Users now need both Insert and Delete privileges on a table to perform REPLACE. [#23939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23939)
>     - Fix some string function get wrong result [#23879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23879)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> + TiKV
> 
>     - Fix IN expr(coprocessor) didn't handle unsigned/signed int properly [#10018](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10018)
>     - Fix the issue that there are lots of empty regions after batch ingest. [#10015](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10015)
>     - Use `zstd` to compress the snapshot [#10005](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10005)
>     - Fix potential panics when input of cast_string_as_time is invalid UTF-8 bytes [#9995](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9995)
>     - Fix the bug that TiKV cannot startup when the end of file dict file is damaged. [#9992](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9992)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

+ PD

    - Modify score calculator to satisfy isomerous stores [#3605](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3605)
    - Avoid unexpected statistic modify after adding scatter region scheduler [#3602](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3602)

+ Tools

> 

Reviewer 2: - Lightning

* Fix the bug that the table count in the progress log is wrong. [#1005](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1005)

    - BR

> 

Reviewer 2: * Fix a bug caused the real backup speed may go beyond far the `--ratelimit`. [#1026](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1026)

>         * BR now can tolerate minor TiKV disconnection. [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Fix the issue that BR cannot tolerate minor TiKV disconnection. [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)
```

>         * Summary now become more clear. [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Fix the issue that the summary log is not clear. [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)
```

    - TiCDC

        * Fix Unified Sorter returning unhelpful error messages & other misc. fixes. [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)

>         * S3Sink:  cancel create existing table directory on s3 when initialize s3Sink to avoid uploading objects faild [#1672](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1672)

Reviewer 2: Fix the issue that creates the existing table directory on minio when initializing causes uploading objects to fail.

>         * Fix Unified Sorter returning unhelpful error messages & other misc. fixes. [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        * Fix data race and unhelpful error message in unified sorter. [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)
```

>         * No release note (this bug is never released) [#1667](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1667)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

        * Set session variable `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` to `ON` to make downstream MySQL5.7 keeps the same behavior with upstream TiDB. [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)

>         * Fix the error handling for io.EOF may cause replication interuption. [#1648](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1648)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        * Fix the error handling for io.EOF which may cause replication interuption. [#1648](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1648)
```

        * Correct TiKV CDC endpoint CPU metric in TiCDC dashboard. [#1645](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1645)

>         * S3 sink: increase the defaultBufferChanSize of logSink to avoid blocking [#1632](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1632)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Increase the defaultBufferChanSize of logSink to avoid blocking [#1632](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1632)
```

    - Fix range building for binary literal [#24041](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24041)
    - Fix wrong results for in clause [#24023](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24023)
    - Fix the wrong result of some string functions  [#23879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23879)
    - Users now need both INSERT and DELETE privileges on a table to perform REPLACE [#23939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23939)
    - Fix performance regression of point select [#24070](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24070)

+ TiKV

    - Fix IN expr(coprocessor) didn't handle unsigned/signed int properly [#10018](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10018)
    - Fix the issue that there are lots of empty regions after batch ingest. [#10015](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10015)
    - Fix potential panics when input of cast_string_as_time is invalid UTF-8 bytes [#9995](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9995)
    - Fix the bug that TiKV cannot startup when the end of file dict file is damaged. [#9992](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9992)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ Tools
    - Lightning
          * Fix the bug that the table count in the progress log is wrong. [#1005](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1005)
    
    - BR
         * Fix the bug that caused the real backup speed may go beyond far the `--ratelimit`. [#1026](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1026)
         * Fix the issue that BR cannot tolerate minor TiKV disconnection. [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)    
          
    - TiCDC
         * Fix the issue that creates the existing table directory on minio when initializing causes uploading objects to fail. [#1672]
         * Set session variable `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` to `ON` to make downstream MySQL5.7 keeps the same behavior with upstream TiDB. [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)
         * Fix the error handling for io.EOF may cause replication interruption. [#1648](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1648)
        * Correct TiKV CDC endpoint CPU metric in TiCDC dashboard. [#1645](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1645)
        * Increase the defaultBufferChanSize of logSink to avoid blocking [#1632](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1632)
```

+ PD

    - Modify score calculator to satisfy isomerous stores [#3605](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3605)
    - Avoid unexpected statistic modify after adding scatter region scheduler [#3602](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3602)

+ Tools
- Lightning

* Fix the bug that the table count in the progress log is wrong. [#1005](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1005)
    - BR
* Fix the bug that caused the real backup speed may go beyond far the `--ratelimit`. [#1026](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1026)
        * Fix the issue that BR cannot tolerate minor TiKV disconnection. [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)
        * Fix the issue that the summary log is not clear. [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)

    - TiCDC

        * Fix Unified Sorter returning unhelpful error messages & other misc. fixes. [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)
        * Fix the issue that creates the existing table directory on minio when initializing causes uploading objects to fail. [#1672](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1672)

>         * Fix text type decode for old row format [#1669](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1669)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

>         * Fix text type decode for old row format [#1669](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1669)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
title: TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes

> Release date: April 23, 2021

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Release date: April 24, 2021
```

TiDB version: 5.0.1

## Improvements

+ TiKV

    - Use `zstd` to compress the Region snapshot [#10005](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10005)

+ PD

    - Modify the Region score calculator to better satisfy isomerous stores [#3605](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3605)
    - Avoid the unexpected statistics after adding the `scatter region` scheduler [#3602](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3602)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Remove some might-be-misunderstood information in the summary log [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)

## Bug Fixes

+ TiDB

    - Fix the issue that the execution result of project elimination might be wrong when the projection result is empty [#24093](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24093)
    - Fix the issue of wrong query results when the column contains `NULL` values in some cases [#24063](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24063)
    - Forbid generating MPP plans when the scan contains virtual columns [#24058](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24058)
    - Fix the wrong reuse of `PointGet` and `TableDual` in Plan Cache [#24043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24043)

>     - ping @eurekaka @winoros: Append common handle columns into the schema of index merge table plan [#24042](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24042)

Reviewer 5: @eurekaka @winoros For this note, there is a remarkable difference between the English version and the Chinese version. **Neither version** reads through. **Neither version** syntactically makes sense. **Neither version** is within my capacity to comprehend and to make decisions. Please take a look, fix the note in both languages, and make sure that the two versions are literally consistent.

The Chinese version: ``` `IndexMerge` 算子需要保留聚簇索引的输出 [#24042](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24042) ```

Reviewer 3: Oh, they should be the same meaning. Just because where's no common translation for the `Schema`. So translate `the schema of index merge table plan` to `IndexMerge` 算子的输出`

>     - ping @eurekaka @winoros: Append common handle columns into the schema of index merge table plan [#24042](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24042)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    - Fix the optimizer error when building IndexMerge plan for clustered indexes [#24042](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24042)
```

修复优化器在为聚簇索引构建 IndexMerge 执行计划时的错误

    - Fix the type inference of the BIT-type errors [#24027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24027)
    - Fix the issue that some optimizer hints do not take effect when the `PointGet` operator exists [#23685](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23685)

>     - ping @winoros @AilinKid: Fix the cases that DDL would parse the args failed when converting job status to rolling back [#24080](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24080)

Reviewer 5: @eurekaka @AilinKid For this note, there is a remarkable difference between the English version and the Chinese version. **Neither version** reads through. **Neither version** syntactically makes sense. **Neither version** is within my capacity to comprehend and to make decisions. Please take a look, fix the note in both languages, and make sure that the two versions are literally consistent.

The Chinese version: ``` 修复某些情况下 DDL Job 在将状态设置外 rolling back 时能出现的参数解析失败问题 [#24080](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24080) ```

    - Fix the issue that the index range of the binary literal constant is incorrectly built [#24041](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24041)
    - Fix the potential wrong results of the `IN` clause in some cases [#24023](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24023)
    - Fix the wrong results of some string functions  [#23879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23879)
    - Users now need both `INSERT` and `DELETE` privileges on a table to perform `REPLACE` operations [#23939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23939)
    - Fix the performance regression when executing the point query [#24070](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24070)
    - Fix the wrong `TableDual` plans caused by incorrectly comparing binaries and bytes [#23918](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23918)

+ TiKV

>     - Fix the issue that the `IN` expression in the coprocessor fails to properly handle the signed or unsigned integer types [#10018](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10018)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the coprocessor fails to properly handle the signed or unsigned integer types in the `IN` expression [#10018](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10018)
```

    - Fix the issue of many empty Regions after batch ingesting SST files [#10015](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10015)
    - Fix the potential panic that occurs when the input of `cast_string_as_time` is invalid UTF-8 bytes [#9995](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9995)
    - Fix a bug that TiKV cannot start up after the file dictionary file is damaged [#9992](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/9992)

+ TiFlash

    - Fix the issue that the storage engine fails to remove the data of some ranges
    - Fix the issue of incorrect results when casting the time type to the integer type
    - Fix a bug that the `receiver` cannot find corresponding tasks within 10 seconds
    - Fix the issue that there might be invalid iterators in `cancelMPPQuery`
    - Fix a bug that the behavior of the `bitwise` operator is different from that of TiDB

>     - Fix the alert issue caused by overlapping ranges when using the prefix key

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the alert issue caused by overlapping ranges when using the `prefix key`
```

    - Fix the issue of incorrect results when casting the string type to the integer type
    - Fix the issue that consecutive and fast writes might make TiFlash out of memory
    - Fix the issue that duplicated column names will make TiFlash raise errors
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash fails to parse MPP plans
    - Fix the potential issue that the exception of null pointer might be raised during the table GC
    - Fix the TiFlash panic issue that occurs when writing data to dropped tables
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash might panic during BR restore

+ Tools

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the issue of the inaccurate table count in the progress log during the import [#1005](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1005)

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - Fix a bug that the real backup speed goes beyond the `--ratelimit` limit [#1026](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1026)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        - Fix a bug that the actual backup speed exceeds the `--ratelimit` limit [#1026](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1026)
```

>         - Fix the issue of backup interruption caused by the failure of a few TiKV node [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue of backup interruption caused by the failure of a few TiKV nodes [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)
```

>         - Fix the issue that BR cannot tolerate the failure of a small number of TiKV nodes [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue of backup interruption caused by the failure of a few TiKV node [#1019](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1019)
```

    + TiCDC

>         - Fix the concurrency issue in Unified Sorter and improve the unhelpful error messages [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Fix the concurrency issue in Unified Sorter and filter the unhelpful error messages [#1678](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1678)
```

>         - ping @amyangfei @3pointer: Fix the issue that creates the existing table directory on minio when initializing causes uploading objects to fail [#1672](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1672)

Reviewer 5: @amyangfei @3pointer For this note, there is a remarkable difference between the English version and the Chinese version. **Neither version** reads through. **Neither version** syntactically makes sense. **Neither version** is within my capacity to comprehend and to make decisions. Please take a look, fix the note in both languages, and make sure that the two versions are literally consistent.

The Chinese version: ``` 修复同步到 minio s3 时，避免重复创建 object 导致同步失败的问题 [#1672](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1672) ```

Reviewer 4: - 修复同步到 s3 时，重复创建目录会导致同步中断的问题
- Fix the bug that redundant directory creation may cause replication interruption in s3 sink

Reviewer 2: 这个问题实际上 S3 没问题，是 minio 不支持，所以可以强调下🤔️ https://github.com/minio/minio/issues/9865

>         - Set the value of the `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` session variable to `ON` by default to make the MySQL 5.7 downstream keep the same behavior with the upstream TiDB [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        - Set the default value of the `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` session variable to `ON` to make the MySQL 5.7 downstream keep the same behavior with the upstream TiDB [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)
```

>         - Set the value of the `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` session variable to `ON` to make the MySQL 5.7 downstream keeps the same behavior with the upstream TiDB [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        - Set the value of the `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp` session variable to `ON` by default to make the MySQL 5.7 downstream keep the same behavior with the upstream TiDB [#1659](https://github.com/pingcap/ticdc/pull/1659)
```

---
title: TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.0.1 Release Notes

Release date: April 23, 2021

TiDB version: 5.0.1

## Compatibility Changes

## New Features

## Improvements

+ TiKV

    - Use `zstd` to compress the snapshot [#10005](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/10005)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Fix the issue that the summary log is not clear [#1009](https://github.com/pingcap/br/pull/1009)

> 

Reviewer 8: + PD
     - Modify score calculator to satisfy isomerous stores [#3605](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3605)
     - Avoid unexpected statistic modify after adding scatter region scheduler [#3602](https://github.com/pingcap/pd/pull/3602)
